[develop]: Added HAFS v2.0.0 release notes along with physics schemes. (#273)
hafs-community/HAFS: doc/UsersGuide/source/CustomizingTheWorkflow/PhysicsSchemes.rst

Land/Ocean surface schemes provide surface temperature, heat and moisture fluxes over land, sea-ice, and ocean points. These serve as a lower boundary condition for the vertical transport in Planetary Boundary Layer (PBL) schemes.

**HAFS uses:**

* Noah Multi-Physics (NOAH-MP) land surface model
* HYCOM, MOM6 for ocean models

.. _SurfaceLayerScheme:

====================
Surface-Layer Scheme
====================

Surface layer schemes represent processes near the surface (<~100 m), where vertical gradients are too large to be resolved by vertical grids. They are usually based on Monin-Obukhov similarity theory.
They provide atmospheric exchange coefficients, stability functions (surface fluxes) needed by land/ocean models and PBL.

HAFS uses the GFS surface-layer model, with observation-based roughness length (particularly for strong wind conditions). Modified Zo is important for a successful simulation of TCs. Hurricane intensity is proportional to (Ck/Cd) over the ocean (Emanuel, 1995), where Cd and Ck are the sea-surface momentum and enthalpy exchange coefficients. Larger z0 leads to larger Cd and Ck.

.. _PBLScheme:

==========
PBL Scheme
==========

> PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion.
> 
> HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.
> 
> Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
>                                    mass-flux (MF)       eddy-diffusivity (ED)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion. HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.

.. code-block:: console
   Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
                                                          mass-flux (MF)           eddy-diffusivity (ED)
```

> **TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion. We have two modifications:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion, so two modifications were made:
```

  1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)
  2. LES-based TC PBL adjustment including model coefficients, Richardson number calculation, high-wind mass flux, etc. (HFSB)

.. _ScaleAwareConvection:

===============================================

> Scale-aware Deep and Shallow Convection Schemes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scale-Aware Deep and Shallow Convection Schemes
```

===============================================

> Scale-aware deep and shallow convection schemes are used when moisture convections are too small to be resolved explicitly by grid spacing; reducing the thermodynamic instability.
> HAFS uses GFS Scale-aware SAS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scale-aware deep and shallow convection schemes are used when moisture convection is too small to be resolved explicitly by grid spacing, reducing the thermodynamic instability. HAFS uses GFS Scale-Aware SAS. 
```
What is SAS? Is it Scale Aware Schemes? Or is SAS a particular scale-aware scheme?

.. _PhysicsSchemes:

***********************
Physics Schemes in HAFS
***********************

This chapter contains information regarding the various physics schemes in HAFS.

.. _Land/OceanSurfaceSchemes:

==========================
Land/Ocean Surface Schemes
==========================

> Land/Ocean surface schemes provide surface temperature, heat and moisture fluxes over land, sea-ice, and ocean points. These serve as a lower boundary condition for the vertical transport in PBL schemes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Land/Ocean surface schemes provide surface temperature, heat and moisture fluxes over land, sea-ice, and ocean points. These serve as a lower boundary condition for the vertical transport in Planetary Boundary Layer (PBL) schemes.
```

**HAFS uses:**

* **Noah land surface model (NOAH MP)**

> * **HYCOM, MOM6 for ocean models**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Noah Multi-Physics (NOAH-MP) land surface model
* HYCOM, MOM6 for ocean models
```

.. _SurfaceLayerScheme:

====================
Surface-Layer Scheme
====================

> Processes near the surface (<~100 m), where vertical gradients are too large to be resolved by vertical grids. Usually based on Monin-Obukhov similarity theory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Surface layer schemes represent processes near the surface (<~100 m), where vertical gradients are too large to be resolved by vertical grids. They are usually based on Monin-Obukhov similarity theory.
```

> 
> Provide atmospheric exchange coefficients, stability functions (surface fluxes) needed by land/ocean models and PBL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They provide atmospheric exchange coefficients, stability functions (surface fluxes) needed by land/ocean models and PBL.
```

> HAFS uses the GFS surface-layer model, with observation-based roughness length (particularly for strong wind conditions).
> 
> Modified Zo is important for a successful simulation of TCs. Hurricane intensity is proportional to (Ck/Cd) over the ocean (Emanuel, 1995), where Cd and Ck are the sea-surface momentum and enthalpy exchange coefficients. Larger z0 leads to larger Cd and Ck.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses the GFS surface-layer model, with observation-based roughness length (particularly for strong wind conditions). Modified Zo is important for a successful simulation of TCs. Hurricane intensity is proportional to (Ck/Cd) over the ocean (Emanuel, 1995), where Cd and Ck are the sea-surface momentum and enthalpy exchange coefficients. Larger z0 leads to larger Cd and Ck.
```

.. _PBLScheme:

==========
PBL Scheme
==========

> Turbulent scale mixing/diffusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion.
```

HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.

Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies

>                                    mass-flux (MF)       eddy-diffusivity (ED)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion. HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.

.. code-block:: console

   Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
                                                         mass-flux (MF)       
   eddy-diffusivity (ED)
```

**TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion. We have two modifications:**

>   1. Adjust mixing length near the surface, so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)
```

>   2. LES-based TC PBL adjustment including model coefficients, Richardson# calculation, high-wind mass flux, etc. (HFSB)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. LES-based TC PBL adjustment including model coefficients, Richardson number calculation, high-wind mass flux, etc. (HFSB)
```

.. code-block:: console
   Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
                                                          mass-flux (MF)           eddy-diffusivity (ED)

TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion, so two modifications were made:

  1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)
  2. LES-based TC PBL adjustment including model coefficients, Richardson number calculation, high-wind mass flux, etc. (HFSB)

.. _ScaleAwareConvection:

===============================================
Scale-Aware Deep and Shallow Convection Schemes
===============================================

Scale-aware deep and shallow convection schemes are used when moisture convection is too small to be resolved explicitly by grid spacing, reducing the thermodynamic instability. HAFS uses GFS Scale-Aware SAS. 

Main Assumptions
-----------------------

**Deep Convection:**

> A single entraining and detraining plume model is used. The base mass flux operates under a quasi-equilibrium assumption for distances greater than 8 km, determined by a mean updraft velocity for distances less than 8 km. Triggering conditions include the distance between the convection starting level and the level of free convection, sub-cloud convective inhibition, and mean relative humidity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single entraining and detraining plume model is used. The base mass flux operates under a quasi-equilibrium assumption for dx greater than 8 km, determined by a mean updraft velocity for dx less than 8 km. Triggering conditions include the distance between the convection starting level and the level of free convection, sub-cloud convective inhibition, and mean relative humidity.
```

**Shallow Convection:**

Shallow convection is similar to deep convection, except that the base mass flux is averaged based on the updraft velocity in a cloud layer. Only convection updrafts are considered in the shallow scheme. HAFS tests show that HAFS is sensitive to entrainment and detrainment rates. HFSA uses an entrainment rate larger than that in NCEP GFS.

.. _MicrophysicsSchemes:

====================
Microphysics Schemes
====================

**Effects of Vapor-Liquid-Ice Phase Changes:**

HAFS uses GFDL microphysics and Thompson microphysics.

**GFDL:**

The GFDL microphysics is a single-moment scheme that includes QC, QI, QR, QS, and QG. It is based on the Lin-Lord-Krueger cloud microphysics scheme.

**Thompson:**

The Thompson microphysics scheme includes QC, QI, QR, QS, QG, and the number concentration of cloud ice, cloud water, and rain. It also considers the impact of aerosols. HAFS performs well with the Thompson scheme for TCs in the NATL basin and with GFDL for TCs in the EAPC basin.

.. _RadiationSchemes:

=================
Radiation Schemes
=================

Radiation schemes are used for heating and cooling due to short- and long-wave radiation.

> HAFS uses the RRTMG radiation scheme. For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used: The shortwave algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the longwave algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses the RRTMG radiation scheme. For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used. The shortwave algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the longwave algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.
```

.. _GravityWaveDrag:

=================
Gravity Wave Drag
=================

> Impact of sub-grid scale perturbations excited by orography and convection.
> 
> **HAFS uses the unified GWD scheme:**
> 
> Mesoscale orographic gravity wave drag, low-level flow blocking by subgrid-scale orography, effects of gravity waves produced by horizontal terrain variations, and non-topographic gravity wave drag (GWD) from convection and frontal instability are considered in the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses the Unified Gravity Wave Drag (GWD) scheme, which considers:

* Mesoscale orographic GWD
* Low-level flow blocking by subgrid-scale orography
* Effects of gravity waves produced by horizontal terrain variations
* Non-topographic GWD from convection and frontal instability
```

.. _SuiteComparison:

================
Suite Comparison
================

> The following table compares the different configurations for Suite 1 (HFSAv2) and Suite 2 (HFSBv2):
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:numref:`Table %s <PhysicsComparison>` compares the different physics configurations used for Suite 1 (HFSAv2) and Suite 2 (HFSBv2).

.. _PhysicsComparison:

```

.. list-table:: Suite Comparison
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Component
     - Suite 1 (HFSAv2)
     - Suite 2 (HFSBv2)
   * - Land/ocean Surface

>      - NOAH LSM VIIRS veg type, MOM6
>      - NOAH LSM VIIRS veg type, HYCOM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - NOAH LSM VIIRS veg type, **MOM6**
     - NOAH LSM VIIRS veg type, **HYCOM**
```

   * - Surface Layer
     - GFS, HWRF TC-specific sea surface roughnesses
     - GFS, HWRF TC-specific sea surface roughnesses
   * - Boundary Layer
     - Sa-TKE-EDMF+shear: sfc_rlm=1, tc_pbl=0, elmx/rlmx=250 (nest)

>      - Sa-TKE-EDMF+shear: sfc_rlm=0, tc_pbl

Reviewer: @jdkublnick I think the end of this table is missing. When you have a chance, could you push whatever changes you have locally and bold anything that is different between the HFSA and HFSB configs?

.. _PhysicsSchemes:

***********************
Physics Schemes in HAFS
***********************

This chapter contains information regarding the various physics schemes in HAFS.

> 

Reviewer: @jdkublnick I think it would make most sense to put the Table comparing HFSA and HFSB physics here in the introduction.

.. _Land/OceanSurfaceSchemes:

==========================
Land/Ocean Surface Schemes
==========================

Land/Ocean surface schemes provide surface temperature, heat and moisture fluxes over land, sea-ice, and ocean points. These serve as a lower boundary condition for the vertical transport in Planetary Boundary Layer (PBL) schemes.

**HAFS uses:**

* Noah Multi-Physics (NOAH-MP) land surface model

> * HYCOM, MOM6 for ocean models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :term:`HYCOM`, :term:`MOM6` for ocean models
```

.. _SurfaceLayerScheme:

====================
Surface-Layer Scheme
====================

Surface layer schemes represent processes near the surface (<~100 m), where vertical gradients are too large to be resolved by vertical grids. They are usually based on Monin-Obukhov similarity theory.

> They provide atmospheric exchange coefficients, stability functions (surface fluxes) needed by land/ocean models and PBL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They provide atmospheric exchange coefficients and stability functions (surface fluxes) needed by land/ocean models and PBL.
```

> HAFS uses the GFS surface-layer model, with observation-based roughness length (particularly for strong wind conditions). Modified Zo is important for a successful simulation of TCs. Hurricane intensity is proportional to (Ck/Cd) over the ocean (Emanuel, 1995), where Cd and Ck are the sea-surface momentum and enthalpy exchange coefficients. Larger z0 leads to larger Cd and Ck.

Reviewer: @BinLiu-NOAA Do you know if _Zo_ in this section refers to surface roughness? (Z0)

.. _PBLScheme:

==========
PBL Scheme
==========

> PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion. HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion. HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) equation.
```

> .. code-block:: console
>    Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
>                                                           mass-flux (MF)           eddy-diffusivity (ED)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console

   Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
                                                          mass-flux (MF)           eddy-diffusivity (ED)
```
This isn't showing up. I think it needs a blank line, but check that it renders once you add it.

TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion, so two modifications were made:

>   1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme (HFSA)
```

===============================================

Scale-aware deep and shallow convection schemes are used when moisture convection is too small to be resolved explicitly by grid spacing, reducing the thermodynamic instability. HAFS uses GFS Scale-Aware SAS. 

Main Assumptions
-----------------------

**Deep Convection:**

A single entraining and detraining plume model is used. The base mass flux operates under a quasi-equilibrium assumption for distances greater than 8 km, determined by a mean updraft velocity for distances less than 8 km. Triggering conditions include the distance between the convection starting level and the level of free convection, sub-cloud convective inhibition, and mean relative humidity.

**Shallow Convection:**

Shallow convection is similar to deep convection, except that the base mass flux is averaged based on the updraft velocity in a cloud layer. Only convection updrafts are considered in the shallow scheme. HAFS tests show that HAFS is sensitive to entrainment and detrainment rates. HFSA uses an entrainment rate larger than that in NCEP GFS.

.. _MicrophysicsSchemes:

====================
Microphysics Schemes
====================

> **Effects of Vapor-Liquid-Ice Phase Changes:**
> 
> HAFS uses GFDL microphysics and Thompson microphysics.
> 
> **GFDL:**
> 
> The GFDL microphysics is a single-moment scheme that includes QC, QI, QR, QS, and QG. It is based on the Lin-Lord-Krueger cloud microphysics scheme.
> 
> **Thompson:**
> 
> The Thompson microphysics scheme includes QC, QI, QR, QS, QG, and the number concentration of cloud ice, cloud water, and rain. It also considers the impact of aerosols. HAFS performs well with the Thompson scheme for TCs in the NATL basin and with GFDL for TCs in the EAPC basin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses GFDL microphysics and Thompson microphysics, which account for the effects of vapor-liquid-ice phase changes. HAFS performs well with the Thompson scheme for TCs in the NATL basin and with GFDL for TCs in the EAPC basin.

**GFDL:**

The GFDL microphysics is a single-moment scheme that includes QC, QI, QR, QS, and QG. It is based on the Lin-Lord-Krueger cloud microphysics scheme.

**Thompson:**

The Thompson microphysics scheme includes QC, QI, QR, QS, QG, and the number concentration of cloud ice, cloud water, and rain. It also considers the impact of aerosols. 
```
We should write out QC/QI/QR/QS/QG the first time.

.. _RadiationSchemes:

=================
Radiation Schemes
=================

Radiation schemes are used for heating and cooling due to short- and long-wave radiation.

> HAFS uses the RRTMG radiation scheme. For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used: The shortwave algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the longwave algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses the RRTMG radiation scheme. For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used. The shortwave algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the longwave algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid-scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.
```

PBL Scheme
==========

PBL parameterization schemes handle subgrid-scale processes near the surface. In HAFS, the PBL scheme is responsible for handling turbulent scale mixing and diffusion. HAFS uses the GFS TKE-EDMF PBL scheme, with a prognostic TKE equation.

.. code-block:: console
   Sub-grid scale turbulent flux = Flux of Large eddies + flux of local small eddies
                                                          mass-flux (MF)           eddy-diffusivity (ED)

TC intensity is sensitive to mixing/diffusion, so two modifications were made:

  1. Adjustment to mixing length near the surface so that it is consistent with that used in the surface-layer scheme. (HFSA)
  2. LES-based TC PBL adjustment including model coefficients, Richardson number calculation, high-wind mass flux, etc. (HFSB)

.. _ScaleAwareConvection:

===============================================
Scale-Aware Deep and Shallow Convection Schemes
===============================================

Scale-aware deep and shallow convection schemes are used when moisture convection is too small to be resolved explicitly by grid spacing, reducing the thermodynamic instability. HAFS uses GFS Scale-Aware SAS. 

> **Main assumptions:**
> 
> **Deep Convection:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Main Assumptions
-----------------------

**Deep Convection:**
```

A single entraining and detraining plume model is used. The base mass flux operates under a quasi-equilibrium assumption for distances greater than 8 km, determined by a mean updraft velocity for distances less than 8 km. Triggering conditions include the distance between the convection starting level and the level of free convection, sub-cloud convective inhibition, and mean relative humidity.

> **Shallow convection is similar to deep convection, except:**
>   
> The base mass flux is averaged based on the updraft velocity in a cloud layer. Only convection updrafts are considered in the shallow scheme. HAFS tests show that HAFS is sensitive to entrainment and detrainment rates. HFSA uses an entrainment rate larger than that in NCEP GFS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Shallow Convection:**

Shallow convection is similar to deep convection, except that the base mass flux is averaged based on the updraft velocity in a cloud layer. Only convection updrafts are considered in the shallow scheme. HAFS tests show that HAFS is sensitive to entrainment and detrainment rates. HFSA uses an entrainment rate larger than that in NCEP GFS.
```

.. _MicrophysicsSchemes:

====================
Microphysics Schemes
====================

> **Effects of vapor-liquid-ice phase changes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Effects of Vapor-Liquid-Ice Phase Changes:**
```

HAFS uses GFDL microphysics and Thompson microphysics.

**GFDL:**

The GFDL microphysics is a single-moment scheme that includes QC, QI, QR, QS, and QG. It is based on the Lin-Lord-Krueger cloud microphysics scheme.

**Thompson:**

> The Thompson microphysics scheme includes QC, QI, QR, QS, QG, and the number concentration of cloud ice, cloud water, and rain. It also considers the impact of aerosols. HAFS performs well with the Thompson scheme for TCs in the NATL basin, and with GFDL for TCs in the EAPC basin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Thompson microphysics scheme includes QC, QI, QR, QS, QG, and the number concentration of cloud ice, cloud water, and rain. It also considers the impact of aerosols. HAFS performs well with the Thompson scheme for TCs in the NATL basin and with GFDL for TCs in the EAPC basin.
```

.. _RadiationSchemes:

=================
Radiation Schemes
=================

> Radiation Schemes are used for heating and cooling due to short and long wave radiation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Radiation schemes are used for heating and cooling due to short- and long-wave radiation.
```

**HAFS uses RRTMG.**

**For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used:**

> The SW algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the LW algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFS uses the RRTMG radiation scheme. For computational efficiency, the correlated K-method is used: The shortwave algorithm includes 112 g-points (quadrature points) in 14 bands, while the longwave algorithm includes 140 unevenly distributed g-points in 16 broad spectral bands. Aerosol optical properties, cloud liquid water and ice paths, and effective radius are used to represent the radiative effects of aerosols and clouds in the calculation. The effects of sub-grid scale clouds are treated by a Monte-Carlo Independent Column Approximation (McICA) method, with a decorrelation length overlap assumption for multi-layered clouds.
```
